Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined again by Doctor Kostas Kempourakis, and
we're going to talk about his new book, Trusting
Science Why We Need to reconsider. School science teaching
and I'm also leaving links to our first two
interviews in the description of this one. So, Doctor
Kampoakis, welcome back to the show. It's always a
pleasure to have you on.
Thank you very much. It's always a pleasure for
me too, to talk to you and discuss about
the books.
Great. So, uh, why did you feel the need
to write such a book now?
Yeah, well, as you know, uh, during the pandemic,
there was a lot of discussion and questions regarding
what scientists can really know and how uh valid
the recommendations about the various measures that we're making
were and uh I, I, I started wondering you.
So why is this happening, uh, knowing that, of
course, there is a lot of uncertainty inherent in
science, but at the same time, uh, the reactions
of people were sometime extreme. So I decided to
look into this and try to understand what might
be the cause. Uh, OF, uh, this issue. There
are several important ones, but in this book, I'm
focusing on what I think is an underexplored question,
how much people really understand about science.
Right. And we're certainly going to get into the
COVID-19 pandemic later in our conversation. But more generally,
how do you look at the current state of
science communication and public trust in science?
On the one hand, scientists are among the most
trusted professionals along with medical doctors. This is what
several polls show with the politicians and journalists being
at the other end. At the same time, uh,
it's not that everyone trusts scientists, you know, polls
show percentages around 60, 70%. So there's an important,
uh, portion of people who are not uh ready
to trust. And this is something. That should make
us wonder why this is the case. You know,
in relative terms, there is trust, uh, but in
absolute terms, there are still people who are wondering
uh if they should trust scientists. This brings us
to science communication, which I think is not effective
in part because scientists are not actively involved, the
experts, the real experts are not actively involved and
And another part, because whenever they do that, it's
not as effective as it should have been. Now,
the point I'm making is that we should not
blame scientists, we should not blame the public, but
we should look into the educational systems and see,
ask the question, have we really prepared Uh, students
to become thoughtful citizens who can ask the right
questions about science and who are ready to understand
what science is about. And I'm sorry to say
that the answer is more or less no.
Right, uh, but what do you mean by trust
in science? What do you trust
exactly? Yes, uh, trust in general is to be
confident that someone can do and will do what
you expect them to do. In other words, when
we trust someone, we believe that that person is
willing and able to do what we expect them
to do. Um, AND this brings us to two
important questions. The first one is whether scientists are
able to Understand nature and advise us when this
is relevant. And the second is when they will
do that. And of course, in the vast majority
of cases, uh, the answer is positive in both
uh because overall the scientific communities that are have
the expertise on specific issues are able to give
us recommendations or at least, uh, they are the
best ones to give us recommendations because there are,
of course, there will always be things that we
will not know. And uh on the other hand,
we know that they have no reason not to
be willing to help us. Uh, HAVING said that,
there always exist and there will always exist, and
there have always existed scientists who are not. That
competent or who are not that goodwilling to help
us, but this does not represent the majority. For
the vast majority of cases, this works and this
is why we should trust them. But the big
question is how we uh should be able to
identify when and how to do this.
Um, WHY did you decide to focus on vaccination
in the book? Of course, it's not the only
topic you go through, but why such a focus
on it?
Yeah. Well, there are two reasons for this. Uh,
THE first one is that during the pandemic, there
was a lot of discussion about vaccines, and this
is a question that concerns every citizen. It's not,
of course, the only one or not even the
only important one. Climate change is another, but it
is something that has been uh bothering people forever.
And the other reason is that I'm, I'm teaching
a course here in Geneva and I'm giving, um,
I'm giving classes on vaccination, and the history of
vaccination. And my endeavor in this story made me
realize that there's some issues that are not properly
understood, uh, even by my undergraduate biology students. And
so the combination of these, you know, the eternal
questions about vaccines and my observations in what might
be difficult to understand made me focus on that
because as I uh figured out in the end,
uh, If we look carefully at the history of
vaccination, we can see what is that bothers people,
what is that people do not like, and then
this gives us insights about how to address it.
What happened during the COVID-19 pandemic that you think
is illustrative of how the public reacts to scientific
claims, at least nowadays?
Yeah. Well, the first important thing is that for
some people, especially those of us who live in
the Western world, it was something entirely new. People
in Asia had experienced. Uh, PANDEMICS like this at
the shorter scale, of course, in the past, but
it was not that new for them. It was
too new for us here in the Western world.
And the second is that uh the reaction was
immediate and that there was so much funding. Uh,
USED the transfer to the production of vaccines that
we ended up having safe and efficient vaccines that
it was shown along the way too early. And
I'm saying too early in a negative sense because
not everyone was prepared to accept this as a
fact. To accept that, you know, the vaccines that
were produced in less than a year could be
safe first of all and then effective against disease.
Thankfully, that was the case. So, all in all,
we were in a very difficult and uncertain uh
situation with measures that, you know, uh disturbed the
life of many people. And then we were asked.
To get vaccines, to have a medical intervention uh
with products that were produced very, very fast, which,
of course, causes concern, uh, to people. So I,
I think that in the first uh year or
so of the pandemic, these reactions were natural and
normal because that was a new situation and things
were changing very fast.
In regards to vaccination. For people to understand about
it. I mean, how do vaccines work?
Well, the important thing for people to understand is
that simply put, with vaccines, we somehow simulate an
infection. The difference is that Whereas the first time
that we will be infected, we may develop the
disease with vaccines, it's very unlikely to develop the
disease. We may have some people may have some
symptoms, but the important thing is that the, our
immune system uh is prepared and The first time
it will encounter a pathogen, it will react as
if, if it was the second. What we do,
in other words, is that we make our immune
system ready to produce the necessary cells so that
it reacts efficiently and so that we avoid the,
the disease.
And uh of course, during this pandemic, uh MRNA
vaccines were produced. So what should people know about
these vaccines that were produced and administered during the
COVID-19 pandemic?
That was a new technology, uh, which also had
its, you know, concerns, but it's one that works
very well. In some cases, uh, it is much
more efficient than other methods. It's not the only
one, of course, but it seemed to work very
well and produce uh the necessary coverage uh and
the necessary protection for our organism. And DNA is
something that exists in all our cells. It's not
something that we cannot find there. And it was
just uh a specific procedure in the process of
producing the necessary molecules that will make our immune
system react and prepare for the future infection. It's,
there's nothing unnatural, uh, in, in all that.
Yes, I, I mean, one of the things I
heard from some people, some people who were worried
about these vaccines back in the pandemic, like 3
or 4 years ago, was that they thought that
because they were MRNA vaccines, they would be able
to get into our the genetic material in our
cells. I mean, but does that make any sense?
No, this is not at all the case. Exactly
because the process of all this does not entail
that these molecules will enter the nuclei where our
DNA is found. In contrast, these stay outside the
nuclei in what we call the cytoplasm, where the
proteins that we need for uh protection and to
initiate the reaction of the immune system will produce.
So I would say it is exactly the opposite.
There are other kinds of vaccines that might require
an integration of something. Uh, INSIDE the nucleus, but
this is not what we have here.
Great. So, uh, but what leads to vaccine distress?
Why do people develop this kind of
distrust? Yeah, I think there are two main reasons.
The first one, it is a medical intervention, uh,
that is against. Something that we do not see.
So, when people are sick, they will immediately get
uh whatever their doctors recommend to get over the
sickness and disease that they're dealing with. In the
case of vaccines, there's no disease yet. So we
are asked to make a medical intervention against something
that is not there. And this makes people uncomfortable.
Uh, THE other part is that in some cases,
not very often, uh, there are, uh, secondary effects
of vaccines just because some people are more sensitive
to these molecules or for other reasons. These are,
these are rare, but they do happen. So, the
combination of these two, the fact that we're asked
to make a medical intervention and get something that
does not yet exist. And the fact that we
listen, people talking about side effects, autism is not
one of these, but, you know, there are secondary
effects. Some people, to put it simply react uh
more than they should. Uh, TO the vaccine, as
if it was the pathogen itself, makes us concerned.
And so parents, for instance, are wondering why vaccinate
my healthy kid and Insert inside it, inside that
the my boy or my girl, something that, you
know, comes from a pathogen. It is a normal
reaction, I would say to, for a sensitive pattern,
but it is not justified at all because what
we need to think about is not only the
risk uh of having a secondary effect due to
the vaccine, which is very low, but also the
risk of dealing and dying from the disease, which
is much higher in the case of infectious diseases.
So this is more of um I guess philosophical
question, perhaps a political one as well. But is
taking a vaccine a matter of individual liberty or
of collective responsibility? Because, you know, there are some
people that When they were confronted with certain policies
that were, were set in place to in a
way force people to take the vaccine, uh, they
didn't like it and they said that they should
only take the vaccine if they wanted, that it
was a matter of individual. Liberty, but I mean,
what do you think about? Yeah,
well, it depends on the vaccine and actually depends
on the disease we're talking about. If we're talking
about a disease like tetanus, where the pathogen is
not transmitted from one person to the other, then
it is entirely a matter of individual, uh, liberty.
If people do not want to be exposed. They
can have the vaccine if they want to take
the risk, they can. But in the case of
infectious diseases, diseases where the pathogen is transmitted from
one person to the other, it's no longer about
individual liberty. It's also about collective responsibility because we
should feel uh responsible and take actions not to
transmit pathogens, especially to vulnerable people. So, in other
words, with the SARS COVID-2, the vaccine, the, the
virus that caused the pandemic or with any other
virus or bacterium that are transmitted from one person
to another, uh, the question of vaccination that Not
only concern our personal protection, but also the protection
of others, especially people who are vulnerable, depending on
the situation, usually very young or very old, or
people who cannot be vaccinated because they have issues
with their immune system.
So another example that you explore in the book
has to do with abortion. Uh, IN this particular
case, explain how science can inform decisions but cannot
alone support them.
Yeah. Well, this relates to the previous question you
asked. So uh whether being vaccinated is a question
of individual. Liberty or collective responsibility is an ethical
question. It's not a scientific question. Science can tell
us what happens. It can inform our decisions, but
then it depends on our morals and ethics to,
to, to decide how to deal with this. Similar
is the case with abortion or the termination of
pregnancy as we can call it, because we cannot
really define in Absolute terms when life begins. So
the two cells that fuse during fertilization, the sperm
and the ovum, these are alive. And so uh
they have functions and so is uh the zygote,
the fertilized egg that results from that and so
it is the plastocyst that implants on uh the
mother's uterus and so on. However, We also know
that there's so many fertilized eggs that are never
implanted for whatever reason, and this is natural. So,
the fact that we have a bunch of cells
that have the functions of life does not entail
necessarily that we have an individual with Rights. And
this is again a decision that can be informed
based on our knowledge from science, but uh we
cannot be made on the basis of scientific facts.
It has to do with our uh values. It
has to do with our morals and perhaps our
legal decisions, our legal perceptions of what is happening.
So the issue here overall is that science in
many times can inform our decisions, but we need
to consider other aspects, our values above all, to,
to decide what to do.
Mhm. Yes, so in this particular case of abortion,
of course, apart from the fact that it's hard
to tell exactly when life begins. Another thing that
people usually discuss and they are worried about or
interested in is when exactly does uh A person
begin or when does the figures acquire personhood and
that's more of a philosophical than a scientific question.
Correct. Exactly. Uh, uh, WE, the fact that we
have living cells does not, uh, entail that we
have a person there, and the decision about this
bunch of cells is a person is an important
one, but it's not a scientific question. It's something
that we need other uh kinds of uh thinking
in order to make a decision and it's quite
more subjective because, you know, in different societies, different
decisions are made. Mhm.
So what, what are the aspects of how science
works that you think are the most important for
the public to understand?
There are many aspects of what we call nature
science, what science is and what we do that
in my view, and that's the final recommendation in
the book, should be taught to every future citizen.
But for many reasons, this is not what we
do. We tend to focus on content knowledge, which
in my experience as a former teacher and teacher
educator, these are details that students will Soon forget.
Whereas we should try to educate them to understand
the mentality, the habits of minds, and the processes
that scientists follow when they do science. And I
have a list of specific features uh of science
in my book that are important to understand, which
do not come from my normative philosophical analysis of
what science is, but it comes from my analysis
of the controversies. So I looked at specific controversies
throughout the history of vaccination and I figured out
what people were asking about and from this, what
they could not understand. And just to be clear,
I'm not blaming people for not understanding what they,
what they failed to understand, but I'm blaming the
educational systems that did not prepare them to do
this. To put it simply, you know, if people
cannot read, Uh, it's not themselves to blame, but
the educational system that did not teach them how
to read. In the same sense, if people do
not understand science, we should go back and look
at the educational systems and what they did in
order to prepare them for this. And in my
view, this is something that we do not do
very well, or perhaps we do not do at
all. And this is uh what the book is
about is a call about reconceptualizing, reconsidering what we
do in schools.
And what constitutes evidence in science? How is evidence
established?
Well, what we, what scientists are looking for are
data. Uh, WHICH are, uh, facts, uh, uh, information,
observation that can be found out there. Now, this
becomes evidence under a specific theoretical framework or theoretical
uh lens philosophical sometimes framework and the interpretations may
differ. The important point of for science is that
whatever the case, we cannot uh make conclusions and
we cannot explain anything if we don't have data
which we have analyzed and interpreted and in that
sense, that becomes evidence for or against the conclusion.
Now, the problem, as I explained in the book
is that sometimes we do not have the evidence
we want to have because we cannot have it
or because we have not yet found it. And
this is what causes misunderstandings because lay people sometimes
think that scientists can answer all questions or that
they can have all the necessary evidence, but this
is not the case. So what we need to
do is to explain to them what kinds of
data. Data we're looking for, how they become evidence
in specific contexts, and what we, what kinds of
inferences we can make from this. Unfortunately, we cannot
have all that we need and we cannot understand
all that we want and that's a natural part
of science.
So, how should people deal with uncertainty in science
and with the fact that knowledge in science keeps
changing and getting updated all the time? Because I
think this is a crucial aspect of how science
works that people fail to have a proper grasp
of and then possibly also leads to them uh
distrusting science.
Well, we have to learn to live with that.
We have to accept it. And unfortunately, The way,
sometimes the way science is portrayed in the public
sphere gives a sense of, you know, absolute knowledge,
definitive knowledge. And there are people who use the
word science or scientific to uh describe something as
authoritative as certain. And of course, there are many
things we are certain about, but there are also
things that we do not know because uncertainty is
inherent in science. And as we explained with a
colleague in another book uh uh about uncertainty, it
actually makes science advance because the more we do
not know, the more questions we ask, and the
more we end up understanding. This is something that
is not easy to accept, but whether we like
it or not, science can offer the best possible
answers to our scientific questions, but there will always
be things that we will not know.
So to illustrate uncertainty, tell us about it in
the specific case of medicine and how the practice
of medicine is based on calculated risk.
Yes. We have uh epidemiological studies. We can tell
us a lot about how often we find one
or the other disease or even one or the
other factor that causes disease, you know, exposure to
chemicals or, you know, uh sites on. DNA associated
with diseases. And from that, we can estimate how
likely it is for any person to develop one
or the other disease given their uh life habits,
given their family history and everything about this. But
there's no way that we can absolutely predict what
would happen to one or the other individual. And
this is when some people get frustrated because, you
know, we may say that a disease is very
rare, but when it happens to a person, it's
1, 100% for them, and that's difficult to deal
with. So a big issue is to make the
distinction between the statistics, the epidemiological data, and what
happens to each individual. And we need to understand
that we can make inferences from the former about
the latter, but we cannot be certain. The other
thing has to do with the medical interventions and
I use the uh the concept of calculating the
risk in the story of uh polio because when
they made the, the clinical trials in the 50s,
they knew that there might be problems. They were
not entirely certain about the vaccine. But at the
same time, the parents were so concerned about protecting
their children, and I have to know that polio
was not the most deadly disease, but it affected
children and it left them sometimes with difficult problems
uh to deal with. That they decided, you know,
to take the risk and vaccinate them in order
to refrain from having the disease. And in that
case, they estimated that Things might or might not
go wrong and they decided to take the risk.
And because the protocol they followed at the time
was very, very good and they followed it carefully,
there were practically no problems. Unfortunately, when the government
took the, over the vaccine production on a larger
scale, things were not go very well and there
were people who developed disease because of the vaccine.
So the notion of calculated risk is that we
can estimate up to a point and sometimes very,
very, with a smaller march of error, uh what
could happen, but we can never be 100% sure.
So, you just told us about the example of
polio. Tell us also about uncertainty and risk in
the case of cancer. How do, how do doctors
and medical researchers deal with uncertainty and risk in
cancer?
Yeah. First of all, cancer is not one disease.
It's a collection of diseases that have to do,
have this some similar features, but depending on the
organs that are affected, you know, uh, treatment, uh,
interventions, prediction can be very different. So, what we
know in general is that people that have a
family history uh of cancer are more likely. To
develop it and should be more careful. And this
is not necessarily hereditary because, you know, there are
families that may be exposed to the same factory
in their environment and that and had developed cancer
because of that. The point is that the family
history can give us a good sense. Uh, TO,
you know, be on alert and, uh, try to
help people avoid that. But of course, there are
people who develop cancer without having any family history,
and this has to do with the specific environments
and the specific exposures that they had. And most
importantly, with the fact that we do not really
know what is the cause of cancer. Sometimes they
say that they are mutations, but in recent years,
we have come to understand that the mutations are
not the cause, are perhaps the effect of uh
problems in cellular interactions. So, all in all, because
in most cases, we do not really know the
exact cause even though there are cancers that are
due to specific mutations that we have identified. Uh,
WE cannot really do much except, uh, recommending clinical,
uh, examinations, clinical exams at, at particular ages in
order to avoid uh this as much as possible.
Why is it important for people to trust the
experts and to what extent should they trust them?
It is important because the experts are those who
know. And it is important to note that any
scientist can be an expert in very, very few
domains and not in anything about science. So, even
though um I wrote a book about vaccines and
trust in science, I'm not an expert in vaccines
and I'm not the one to consult when a
person has a question about vaccines. They are experts
in vaccinology, pediatricians who have worked on that for
years, and they are the ones to consider. And
of course, these people have no expertise in climate
science, for which we have other people who are
working on that. So all in all, what we
need to do is to be able to identify
who are these people who really know what they're
talking about. And luckily, this is something that can
be done because for each topic, there are specific
communities, scientific communities of experts who have a collective
knowledge about uh a topic and this is who
we should trust, not individual scientists, but the, the
scientific community uh related to the topic as a
whole and their collective knowledge because all of them
together, they filter. The evidence that is there, they
discuss and they arrive at conclusions which I think
we should trust because this is the best knowledge
we can have.
Right. But when it comes to identifying the experts,
people should trust, how can lay people determine who
are the real experts when it comes to particular
claims?
Well, this is not really easy to do, but
People at least should be aware that in each
domain, there are people that have studies, uh, and
have uh experience and have worked on specific topics
for years and have publications and are respected from
their peers. So all in all, people could be
able to identify who are the experts in each
domain. And of course, the experts know one another
and they can tell us that. But exactly because
this is difficult to do, it is easier for
people to trust the respective societies, the respect. Communities.
So, for instance, if the American Cancer Society or
the European Cancer Society or any other such society
makes uh a statement about something, we should know
that this comes from the consensus of the people
involved in this society who are all experts. And
this is what we should prioritize and not the
view of an individual, even if that individual is
an expert, uh who has a different view.
But when experts disagree, which sometimes happen, who should
people
trust? If it is about individuals, we should look
at who these individuals are. But uh we should
also see where these individuals belong. And for instance,
if we have an individual that represents the consensus
view, who represents a scientific community against someone who
does not, then it is more uh rational to
trust the person who represents the community and express
the consensus view. Now, having said that, in the
history of science, we have had many macro scientists
who opened new ways uh and changed what we
what we know and how we understand it because
they had insights that the community did not have
and the community sometimes was very resistant. Of course,
this is the case, but this is less likely
to happen than the opposite. So in the case
that we have such a scientist who is a
brilliant person and who sees what the community cannot
see, we could look at, you know, who this
person is. Is that person really an expert? And
what the others say about his, her views. For
instance, if the views of that person have undergone
Peer review and are published in an acceptable uh
venue, a general, for instance, then we should carefully
consider that. And there will be times when the
scientific community for some time would not have made
a definite decision as it was the case during
the pandemic, but in the end, there will be
a consensus, we will arrive in the consensus. But
this is less likely to happen or at least
it happens less often than the other way around.
Uh, IN what circumstances should people hold a skeptic
attitude towards certain scientific claims? I mean, when is
it warranted?
First of all, being skeptical is a healthy attitude
towards science and it is healthy attitude among scientists.
All scientists should be skeptical until we examine the,
the relevant evidence and, you know, decide whether it
stands or the claim stands or not. But when
we see um Different claims. We should look at
who is the expert. And when there's a new
claim about something that we have not seen, then
we should, we should try to see what is
the consensus view about that. So, in the book,
I have a diagram that guides people to think
about this and make decisions, which I hope it
will be it will prove useful. It's not always
easy, but there's specific elements that we should consider
that more or less relate to the expertise of
the person and how far that person is from
the consensus view. This is a guide that can
help us better understand what the, what is happening.
Uh, BUT what is the difference between being reasonably
skeptic of certain claims and being a science denier?
Because I think that many times, uh, the difference
is not very clear.
Yes, science deniers are. People, luckily, very few, uh,
who make, of course, a lot of noise, uh,
who think that in principle, scientists, uh, conspire to,
you know, hide the truth, not let us know
what is happening. They have bad intentions and all
that. Uh, THERE'S not much we can do about
these people. Of course, an interesting question to ask
is, you know, what would these people like to
see in order to change their mind? But I'm
more concerned about people who distrust science, people who
do not know what to think about science because
they cannot really handle uh what is happening and
this is what we should pay attention to. I'm
the first to say that no one should blindly
trust scientists. People should have the means to understand,
as a colleague described things to be informed outsiders
and understand what is happening to the extent that
they can. And here comes the responsibility of the
experts and of the scientific communities to make things
as clear as possible uh to lay people. Uh,
SCIENTISTS have a real important responsibility to explain things
to the public, in part because it is the
public through taxes that funds research in, in many
cases, but also they have a moral responsibility because
if they do not do it, then someone else
might and might take things to a different direction.
Mhm.
So we've already talked about how certain questions uh
have to deal more with philosophy than science. So
let me ask you now, what is the relationship
between science and policy?
There are specific disciplines in science that have an
impact on policy decisions. Climate change, climate science is
one, vaccine science is another. Uh, THESE are scientific
domains that inform political decisions, you know, what to
do about emissions in the first case, whether or
not to vaccinate people on the other. And this
is where things get difficult and nobody or almost
no one worries about quantum mechanics or cell biology
because this may not be perceived to have a
direct impact on our everyday life. But when it
comes to climate science or vaccines, for instance, these
do have an impact and this do uh affect
the decisions made. And this is where people mostly
react to. People are mostly concerned about the scientific
knowledge that has an impact on everyday life and
they are right to do so. And this is
exactly the science. I call it in the book,
Policy Science, science related to policy that we need,
uh, that the experts need to clearly explain to
laypeople.
Uh, BUT I mean, it's not the case that
when it comes to policy, we can derive, uh,
the proper policies that we should adopt, uh, directly
from science or from science, or we can determine
them from science alone.
No. This is not, this can never be the
case because there are always other factors to consider.
Let me give you an example. If during the
first month of the pandemic, uh for you, that
was March 2020, all of us stayed inside our
houses for two weeks, there would be no pandemic.
But it was practically impossible for everyone to stay
inside. And uh we know what happened uh next.
So scientists, of course, recommending measures like, you know,
public, uh distancing and things like that, masks and
all these things because we know that they can
work, but the decisions made had or to also
consider, for instance, the economy. Or the mental health
of people. And this is why different countries um
made different decisions about uh the the measures they
took. With different results that we can now analyze
and understand. But there is no way that these
decisions could have been made only on the basis
of science because science might say, yes, if we
avoid contact, this will end, but people had to
earn their living and people had to work and
get uh they needed. So this was never that
simple. And this is, this could have never been
a decision that scientists alone could have made. The
politicians make these decisions and they have to consider
different kinds of aspects, different kinds of factors. And
this is what they did with more or less
success depending on the country.
So tell us about the case of eugenics from
the last century. Was its implementation based on any
solid science and evidence?
Yeah, well, this is an example of where, you
know, uh political decisions. CAN be made on sciences
that is not solid. The sad fact is that
until the late 1920s, most geneticists accepted the premises
and the assumptions of eugenics, even though the evidence
was not that strong. But for different reasons, people
were convinced that we could improve. Uh OUR species,
our societies with this. Along the way, they started
to understand that this does not really work and
in the 30s, many started to react. But unfortunately,
it was too late for the people who were
sterilized in many countries and this happened even after
uh the Second World War until the 70s in
some countries. And later on in Nazi Germany, with
uh the extreme application of these uh measures uh
to those who were considered unworthy of life. Um
In retrospect, we know that there was really no
evidence, but at the time, it was a problem,
especially in the beginnings, that most scientists would agree
that eugenics was something that we could rely on
and that we could trust. And this, of course,
poses a question, well, here's a case where the
community agreed, people might have trusted them and look
at the results. Well, this is the case, but
it wasn't the case for too long because at
some point, there were reactions uh that made most
of them change their minds, you know, within a
decade or so. A decade, of course, is a
lot, but then, We should note that it's not
only about the scientists themselves. Policy decisions were different
in different countries. For instance, in Britain, there were
never any eugenics policies about sterilization. Uh, THEY tried
to isolate what the people they considered feeble-minded, and
this is the country where it all began, but
they were never sterilizations to the extent that they
were made, for instance, in the United States. So
once again, it is the political decisions that are
important. And not only the scientific view.
So we've already talked earlier about uncertainty, for example,
more broadly, what are the limitations of science that
people should keep in mind?
Well, science is a human activity, we as humans,
we're limited in many respects in our perception, our
understanding. So, uh it has the limitations that any
human activity can have. Of course, things change, the
instruments we use improve our understanding of nature improves,
but we should not expect from science to give
us definitive answers about everything. There are many topics
that we understand and know very well and they
are unlikely to change, but there are also things
that are under development where our knowledge is less
certain. What we lay people should keep in mind
is that science gives the best rational answers to
these questions. It is the best we can have
and we need to learn to live with that.
So one final question then, what do you think
should be taught in schools about science to improve
the ways people think about and deal with the
scientifically?
All these that we have been discussing for the
last 45 minutes, all these aspects of science, all
these features of science that are not discussed so
that students as future citizens end up having reasonable
and rational expectations from the sci. COMMUNITIES. Students should
be taught how to figure out who is the
expert. They should understand that skepticism, healthy skepticism is
very natural to have in science. They need to
understand that science relies on solid knowledges that comes
out from independent testing and different uh approaches to
the same question, and that in the end, it
is the consensus view of the community that we
should trust more than anything else.
Great. So, the book is again interesting Science, why
we needed to reconsider School Science Teaching. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And Doctor Kempoakis, just before we go, apart
from the book, would you like to tell us
where people can find your work on the internet?
Yes, I have a personal page with uh on
based on the name based on my surname, Camps.com,
where all the information about uh my books and
my work is available.
Great. So thank you so much for coming on
the show again. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you very much for the invitation. It's always
a pleasure for me too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called in Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poultonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco
Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith Jen
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.